# Ideal Extraction

For any given coffee brewed via any given method, there is an 'ideal extraction
window' - a time period of brewing in which an ideal extraction will occur.

Extraction is referring to two interlinked concepts: a chemical thing, and a
taste profile. At a physical level, extraction is percentage Total Dissolved
Solids, the percentage by mass of your dry coffee that is removed into the
solution at the finish of brewing.

**Under-extraction**, a brew that has less than the ideal mass from your coffee,
will generally taste sharp, sour, and wine-dry.

An **over-extracted** brew will taste harsh, bitter, and astringent.

# Grind Size

The ideal grind is set by a combination of factors, which can be best understood
by looking at the ease by which water can 'fill' a semi-permeable physical
object.

If each object is smaller, it takes less time for water to fully soak into each
individual one, so a smaller grind size for your coffee shortens the ideal
window (each piece will individually reach saturation faster).

Similarly, if each object is larger, it takes longer for water to fully soak
into each one, so by increasing grind size you lengthen the ideal extraction
window (each piece will saturate more slowly).

By using more coffee, you have more soluble material, resulting in more
available compound to extract. If they are all the same size, they should want
the same time, but giving a stronger coffee. However, using more coffee will
result in a more restrictive flow, so in many cases using more water will result
in a slower overall process.

# Water Temperature

Hotter water softens the cellulose structure of the grinds easier. If we control
grind size, hotter water will take less time to fully saturate the particles
than using cold water. Again, this is away of tuning the ideal brewing window.
Temperature is additionally complex, for example above 184F is necessary to
fully extract all desirable compounds.

Generally there has been no proof that water can be too hot. Tune it to your own
coffee.

# Pressure

Pressure directly affects extraction. Higher pressure results in a faster
extraction (when controlling for everything else) compared to a lower pressure
extraction. This is why, for instance, espresso only takes 30-35s at 9bar,
whilst Aeropress will take far more water and generally far longer brewing times
and ideal windows, even if using something similar to an espresso grind.
However, if a particle size and flow rate causes you to increase pressure, this
will speed up extraction. If you need to press hard to hurry things up, you're
probably going to overextract.

# Agitation

The last important thing affecting extraction rate is agitation. Stirring,
primarily, but in many cases the act of adding water at all is also providing
agitation.

The more agitation you have, the faster your brew will be extracting. Similarly
to how volume of water allows more space between grounds and a higher
concentration differential, accelerating extraction, agitation spaces grounds
more evenly across the total volume, whilst accelerating each grounds exposure
to the water it's passing through.

Not agitating your coffee can effectively result in a separation, resulting in
an uneven or overly-dilute-tasting brew, even if all your other controls were
optimal.

In any flow-through brewing (cone, AP normal), and in most steep-and-release
brewing as well (clever, AP invert) your grind size will affect flow-through
rates. The smaller your pieces, the tighter together they can pack, and the more
time it takes water to flow through them. So finer grinds need less time, but
make your brew take longer, while coarser grinds need more time but make your
brew actually go faster.

# Balancing Settings

As we've covered grind size, water temperature, pressure, and agitation, you can
see there are many settings to balance the ideal brew time, with each change
affecting the others.

Tuning temperature is a very volatile way of attempting to compensate, and it's
generally better to keep this constant whilst tweaking the rest.

For most, grind is the best single variable to change whilst controlling
everything else. Depending on your method, technique can be worth tuning if you
feel you are only slightly off of optimal.

# Water volume

The volume of water affects two things, no mater the method--how long it'll take
to finish brewing (everything you put in the top needs to come out the bottom),
as well as how diffuse or not your brew slurry will be.

With more water in the brew, you get more space between the particles, and hence
faster extraction and flow rates.

In most cases, how much water you use in your brewing, versus the amount of
coffee, pretty directly determines the end strength of coffee. Adding water
after the fact was, for a long time, frowned upon. This is known as bypass
brewing, and is somewhat making a resurgence, with recent concensus being that
it doesn't negatively affect the taste of the end, with suggestion to brew a
smaller batch of high-concentration, well-extracted, and then dilute to
palatable levels.

This was originally not recommended due to misunderstanding of extraction,
resulting in a bad brew.

# Bloom

Bloom is somewhat controversial. Many folk are convinced its either useless,
ornamental, or both. There are also many who consider it essential, and see a
good bloom as a necessary indicator of a fresh coffee.

# Filter Rinsing

Again, mostly bullshit. Food-grade stuff isn't going to have chemicals. Maybe,
maybe, you will have some light paper residue. If anything, it makes it easier
to place and stick your filters.

# Why not just ultra-fine, with a lot of water?

The final, and most interconnected concept, is:

*"Why not just use espresso grind in an Aeropress, but with a very fast brew, to
get an even extraction across a narrow window."*

Most consumer grinders are not extremely consistent at the extreme of their
ranges (ultra-coarse or ultra-fine). With the shorter your extraction window,
the tighter your margins of error. An ideal time of 30s probably has a margin of
around 2-4 seconds, whilst a french press with a time of 4 minutes probably has
a window of around 45seconds.

Longer brew times are more tolerant of variance in particle size, and so don't
need such a pricey grinder.
